JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a new
national voice for poetry.
In a tradition dating back to
1937, the Library of Congress
selects a prominent writer to
serve as the country's poet
laureate for terms that have
ranged from one to three years.
The goal, according to
the library, to raise the
national consciousness
to a greater appreciation
of the reading and
writing of poetry.
The new laureate was revealed
today, and our Jeffrey Brown
had a chance to talk with her
earlier this week.
JEFFREY BROWN: Empathy and
self-awareness through language,
that is the creed that comes
through in talking with 45 year
old Tracy K. Smith, writer,
teacher, spouse and mother
of three, including 4-year-old
twins, and now taking on a very
public role as the nation's
poet laureate.
TRACY K. SMITH,ÑMD-BOÑ U.S.
Poet Laureate: This is a
position that allows me to kind
of profess publicly all that
I really hold true privately,
that, if we can listen actively
enough, if we can put
enough pressure on
ourselves and our thought
process, language can be a
real tool of revelation.
I love being able to do
that with my students
and my little seminars.
And I love the idea that maybe
there's a way that this position
allows me to do that with
my fellow Americans.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith is
author of three books
of poetry, including the
Pulitzer Prize-winning
"Life on Mars," in part an elegy
for her father, who served in
the Air Force before leaving
to work on the Hubble telescope.
In her 2015 memoir titled
"Ordinary Light," she
writes of growing up in
a tight-knit middle-class
family in Northern California,
a coming-of-age tale exploring
love and loss, race and faith,
a theme that
suffuses her poetry.
TRACY K. SMITH: I wasn't even
aware that that's what I was
doing until after my last book
of poems came out, and
I realized, wow, there's
a -- these poems are
thinking about space,
but they're also searching
for God, in a way.
And I think it comes back to
that sense that I grew up with
that there is something large
that we can cleave
to, if we choose to.
I wanted to figure out if
there was a way that the artist
in me and the 21st century
academic in me could
find something like a
plausible version of God
or a plausible version
of the afterlife that I would
be willing to claim publicly.
And I think that language
facilitated that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
big area that you're
often exploring is race.
And, in your memoir,
you talk explicitly
about sort of comparing
your upbringing to your
parents and your grandparents,
the differences there, but
also things that have remained.
TRACY K. SMITH: A lot
of my awareness of how
race had imprinted by
my parents, who grew
up in the segregated South,
a lot of that was shaped by a
sense of sadness and a sense
of anxiety on my part that made
me not want to talk about it.
So, there were a lot of silences
that I was drawn to explore
in writing about that time
that I had never felt capable
of bringing into speech
when I was growing up.
As I get older, I realize the
history that felt so ancient
when I was growing up is so
- - so close to us and present
in ways that I had never
imagined, or didn't want to let
myself imagine
when I was a child.
So, writing about it, I think,
is a way of reckoning with
what is yet to be resolved
about the present moment, about
how we are willing to love
each other, even though we
look different from one another.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith has
been a professor at Princeton
since 2005 and now heads its
creative writing program,
teaching small seminars to
young poets in the making.
Here especially, she
says, the emphasis is
on how we use language.
TRACY K. SMITH: Yes, this
is our library and one of
our favorite classrooms.
I want them to start thinking
that a poem isn't just an
expression of all these things
that you're feeling, but
it's a set of choices that
you're making in language.
So, every description, every
question, every statement, every
turn is a choice that opens
up or closes off
certain possibilities.
And you don't always think
about that when you're sitting
down to write in the flush
of emotion.
But thinking about...
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean, the
feelings are part of it, right?
TRACY K. SMITH: The
feelings are part of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the
expression is part of it.
But you're saying the
language choices...
TRACY K. SMITH: Beyond
that, yes, the language
can help you get some
traction in those feelings.
"One of the women greeted me.
'I love you,' she said.
She didn't know me, but I
believed her, and a terrible new
ache rolled over in my chest."
JEFFREY BROWN: To hear some of
her language, Smith read part
of a new poem titled "Wade
in the Water."
TRACY K. SMITH: "I love you
throughout the performance in
every hand clap, every stomp.
I love you in the rusted iron
chains someone was made to drag
until love let them be unclasped
and left empty in the
center of the ring."
JEFFREY BROWN: Now Tracy K.
Smith will have a prominent
voice, a very public national
platform, to reach
new audiences.
If you think about the
tumultuous times we're
in technologically, all
kinds of changes around
us, if you think about
the divisions politically
at this moment, it seems
like an appropriate
moment to say, why poetry?
Why bother?
Why bother being a poet?
What kind of impact could you
possibly have, amidst all that?
TRACY K. SMITH: Mm-hmm.
I will say that a poem
allows or requires you to
submit to something else.
Often...
JEFFREY BROWN: Submit means?
TRACY K. SMITH: That's one of
the things we don't want to
do, to say, OK, I'm not the
expert.
You're the expert.
Let me listen.
Let me respond to
something that's completely
counterintuitive for
me, that pulls me toward
a different sense
of what's valuable.
I think, when we do that with
a work of art, we're learning
how to do that in real time
with other people.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does that mean
even making us better citizens?
TRACY K. SMITH: I think so.
Poems remind us of that.
Poems remind us that someone
is saying, come here.
This has happened to me.
This is how it made me feel.
This is who I am in
the wake of this thing.
And we all have
stories like that.
And they're important to honor,
and they're important also
to say, maybe my story helps
me listen and cherish this
other person's story, too.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith says a key
goal for her as laureate will
be to bring poetry into places
where it's not often heard.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown in
Princeton, New Jersey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, online,
you can watch Tracy K.
Smith read two new poems.
That's on our Web site
at PBS.org/NewsHour.